# Quota Management

Quotas limit the amount of physical resource an entity can provision.
This has numerous benefits, for example:

* Guaranteeing availability to fulfill contractual obligations.
* Limit damage when a bad actor tries to exhaust resources.

## Changelog

- v1.0.0 2024-07-15 (@spjmurray): Initial RFC

## Problem Analysis

### Prior Art

OpenStack takes the approach that everything has a quota.
This, with experience, turns out to be flexible in one respect, but a nightmare in another.

When everything has a quota, then quota handling has to be duplicated everywhere, errors need to be properly propagated.
What tends to happen here is errors disappear into the ether and cause mysterious and non-intuitive provisioning errors.
They need to be diagnosed by a super administrator, and then modified by a super administrator.

Quotas do not play well with such technologies as cluster auto-scaling as what may provision, may not scale, so we need to keep quotas in sync with cluster geometries.

Care must be taken to improve UX over what is presented here, to reduce the support burden, and improve usability of the product.

### Quotas

Quotas primarily act as a safety measure, and limit what an organization can use:

* Ability to stop a user exhausting all resources in the system (denial of service).
* Ability to minimize the cost when a user can or will not pay (fraud prevention).
  * Google for example won't let you go past 50 Gmail users unless you beg then very nicely and pay up front, or pay them more...
* Ability for an organization to guard against excessive OPEX (cost).
* Ability for the operator to control how big of a slice each organization is allowed (scheduling).

#### Scope

Quotas need to be &mdash; initially &mdash; targeted at what really matters to the business.
In the case of Unikorn, things like groups and projects are ostensibly free, so we should not limit these to alleviate the cost of supporting these kinds of quota limits.
What do do care about as a IaaS/PaaS provider are things that cost money to operate:

* Physical machinery.
* Virtual infrastructure e.g. cluster life-cycle managers.

Rather than defaulting to the narrow-minded and very low level view of Hertz and bytes, we should consider higher level primitives for quota allocation.
Business deals get signed on number of cores, GPUs, or even physical machines.

To address the latter point, it's so much easier to put a price on a physical machine, than having to individually add up the cost of every core, every byte of RAM or disk.
Asking for 10 machines &mdash; with 64 cores, 1TiB RAM and 4 GPUs &mdash; is a lot easier than having to figure out that to supply 40 GPUs, you also need 640 cores and 10TiB of RAM to actually fulfill that request.

#### Locality

You can consider quotas at different topological localities:

* Global quotas apply across the whole platform.
* Logical quotas apply to some arbitrary construct.
  * Country or economic zone to facilitate legal requirements.
  * Some group of regions to facilitate cost optimizations/tree hugging credentials.
* Regional quotas apply to a specific region.

Obviously with each step down the hierarchy, things get more complex to implement, configure, test, and maintain, so we should place the onus on simplicity and reliability above all else.

#### Overcommit

If we take the na&iuml;ve view that user A has a quota that takes up 50% of the system, and user B the other 50%, then you cannot schedule any more users on to your finite hardware footprint.
In real life, it's likely that that quota will be under utilized, and unused, essentially burning electricity.
This is especially prevalent with features such as autoscaling that grow and shrink to match the requirements of the workload.
The goal here is to maximize the revenue generated by your hardware.

#### Burst Capacity

Another thing to consider is that a user may want 10 machines, but also the ability to burst up to 20 machines temporarily during busy periods.
How do we model and present this?
Is it overkill?

### Reservations

Quotas address fair use of infrastructure, but offer no guarantees that said hardware will actually be available for use, especially with overcommit.
We have alluded to the idea that a user may want 10 physical machines, and have signed an inviolable contract to that effect.

Where quotas can be seen as a soft guarantee or access to resources (and work well for pay-as-you-go contracts), reservations are hard guarantees (and function as pre-paid contracts).

### Scheduling

This leans more into the usability side of things.
Consider where you have a workload that you need to run, you try a region, that fails because it's out of resource.
Wouldn't it be far better to let the system place it where it can be scheduled?
Going back to earlier points on logical regions, wouldn't is be okay to just place it wherever it fits based on some optional scheduling hints e.g. cost?

> [!NOTE]
> Anecdotally it's like a pub when you ask for "a lager", they will always serve you the most expensive premium brand unless you place some constraints on them...

## Stimuli

**TODO**: What actual inputs do we have into the system?

## Design Considerations

**TODO**: Realistically what can we provide from the problem statement given the reality of stimuli?

## Specification

**TODO**: The meat!
